# 42 pedagogical projects

Here are some pedagogical projects I built on as a member of 42 AI, which were later accepted as projects in the cursus for 42, the "non-school" school of programming.

With my main partner on this effort at the time, Luc Lenôtre, we wanted to find a way to teach higher math to people who were already competent in programming, but who might not even know basic math, or might be scared of it. The original plan was very ambitious, and had around 10 math modules. In the end, we produced 3 projects, which were already impressive work: one on set theory and logic (called *Ready, Set, Boole!*), one on linear algebra (called *Enter the Matrix*), and one on language theory (called *ft_kleene*). These are what is provided here.

There are drafts for a few more, but with Luc out of the picture, and without dedicated resources other than my own passion and (rare) free time and passion, only one last may at some point see the light of day: an ambitious introduction to calculus, including everything from high school to differential geometry, with discrete-vs-continuous feel to it (which I would like to call *The Differential Engine*). However, not feeling up-to-par for now, I will probably wait a couple of years before completing it.

Luc was mostly the initiator and draft-builder for a lot of these, bringing up a lot of ideas for exercises and whatnot. On the other, I acted as an "active editor" of sorts, trying to ensure pedagogical quality assurance, improving the exercise order (or adding intermediary some exercise) to match the rise in difficulty, correcting mathematical inaccuracies, and providing a lot of cultural digressions on math and why it is interesting, especially for computer scientists. That last point is interesting, since 42, when it comes to it projects, often had a strong rejection of "giving info to the student in the project itself". The philosophy was that the student had to be fully autonomous when researching various subjects. Given the ambient mathophobia (math anxiety) that even students of programming have towards mathematics, we thought that "storytelling" guiderails, providing both a sense of confidence, and interesting philosophical and historical tidbits, would go a long way in making these projects provide value and motivation to those motivated in learning mathematics.

These projects were originally made with a CC-BY-NC-SA license, so don't hesitate to use them for self-learning or for your own classes. If you want to discuss adaptations and legalities (such as getting access to the LaTeX sources): don't hesitate to get in touch.

PS: If you want to find the 42-AI Python bootcamps to which I contributed (but wasn't one of the main authors, merely a proofreader and/or tester), you can look for them here [here](https://github.com/Fulguritude/code-discovery-exercises/blob/main/Python/README.md).
